------------
title: Agile Open France 2013 - Takeaways
author: Arnaud Bailly 
date: 2013-01-27
------------

## Summary

Things I learned, heard, discovered, was amazed of, during [Agile Open France 2013](http://blog.agileopenfrance.com/):

* Thanks to Willem Van den Ende, I learnt of the existence of
  [Linux Containers](http://lxc.sourceforge.net/), a project to build
  embedded and isolated servers hosted by a single Linux kernel. I
  knew and have used
  [VServer](http://linux-vserver.org/Welcome_to_Linux-VServer.org) but
  **lxc** appears to have much wider support and a quite large
  community. 
* I worked with Willem (again!) on a very nice idea of its own:
  Managing tasks of projects using [Graphviz](http://graphviz.org)
  graphs whose nodes are tasks and edges are dependencies. The
  graphviz file is stored alongside the project in a git repository
  hence versioned and updated over time while the project is
  unfolding. Tasks may be added, deleted, changed and grouped under
  *clusters* (eg. subgraphs) representing common state: *done*,
  *inprogress*, *todo*, *technical debt*... 
  
    Together with Willem we hacked a Haskell solution to extract data
    from such a graph in order to produce a *Cumulative Flow Diagram*
    for clusters, thus giving some statistical information on the
    projects' progress, lead time and queues size.
    
    Although the Graphviz package's API in Haskell is a bit weird at
    first, we managed to get somewhere in a relatively small time frame
    without prior knowledge of this API, which is a tribute to its
    documentation, above the average.

* While working with Willem, it occured to me that creating
  tasks/issues/tickets classified as *technical debt* was actually a
  pretty good idea. This is not the first time I came across it but I
  now think I will set it up on my next project, and extract regularly
  for the team some metrics on the amount of accumulated technical
  debt. 
  
    The fact that, by reifying the technical debt items in the project
    tracking system, one gets the opportunity to prioritize it like any
    other feature, is definitely a plus. Now, technical debt is
    something that flies in the face of all stakeholders and team
    members when deciding what to do next and we can ground our
    decisions on whether or not we are ready now to accumulate or repay
    part of it.
    
* I took part in a session on *Agile Teaching* with an aim towards
  making courses and teaching to students more amenable to agile
  methods. Laurent Bossavit told us about its experience at Ecole des
  Mines de Douai with a 3-days intensive course which gives student
  the opportunity to practice every aspect of the development
  lifecycle using agile practices and techniques, something which is
  more difficult in a sliced lesson taking place over the course of a
  semester.
  
    Laurent also wisely remarked that we tend to transpose our
    experience as trainers for professional developers in a corporate
    settings to students, which is most of the time wrong. 
  
    Everyone agreed on the importance and benefits of workshops and
    agile games which, apart from boosting the morale of students who
    are bored to death by slideware, provides a rich interactive
    experience to build a more theoretical analysis. I myself tend to
    start with theory than illustrate with practice which is not so
    good and this is something I shall change in my next courses.

* Etienne Charignon demonstrated how they have used FitNesse as their
  *only* testing tool on a recent project and how successful he thinks
  this experience was. Their approach was radical: They did not write
  a single unit test and used only FitNesse to drive their
  *development, something which sounds *impossible* to me. Yet they
  succeeded in delivering a high-quality application (except maybe in
  the GUI area which, as far as I can tell from what Etienne told
  us, lacked tests) which pleased the customer. 
  
    They were lucky enough to have onboard an analyst with some dev
    background who wrote most of the initial tests and maintained the
    FitNesse. They also had few business logic, the application being
    mostly a front-end to some database, hence testing with FitNesse
    tables was really expressive.
  
    I was impressed by how they used FitNesse as an integrated
    *specification tool*, putting all relevant documentation alongside
    the tests and structuring them using features and functional
    areas. I always had mixed feelings with FitNesse as most of the time
    I tried to introduce it, I had a hard time onboarding
    non-developers, although I am really convinced of the interest of
    such a tool to provide accurate, structured and precise
    specification of a piece of software.

* In the train bringing me back home I chatted with Pascal and Luc and
  our discussion happened to fall on the *tests as specification*
  issue. We both agreed that, if only developers are involved in
  writing tests, it is better to devise the tools and processes to
  *generate* specifications from the (JUnit) tests than forcing
  developers to use a tool that gets them outside of their efficiency
  zone (eg. outside of the IDE/CI cycle).

* I ran the
  [extreme startup](http://github.com/abailly/extreme-startup) game
  with Willem (I spent a lot of time with Willem in this conference!)
  on Friday morning. We gave it a little twist by requiring teams to
  select a constraint. This time we played the game, in Haskell, with
  the constraint of not using the REPL which was really alleviated
  when we managed to make Haskell's *doctest* port running. 
  
    Other teams had constraints like: discovering git while developing,
    not using unit tests, developing on the iPad (kudos to Laurent
    Bossavit who managed to have a web server in python running on its
    iPad!).
  
    This was fun and engaging, as always, and Raphaël gave me an idea to
    make it more fun: Allow people to participate in the game as
    *investors*, fuelling the participants with *time* to develop their
    solution according to their business plan and their existing
    codebase. 
    
* I proposed a session inspired by Dan North's
  [Patterns of Effective Delivery]() talk and some blog posts from him
  and Liz Keogh on this subject: How some teams get *past* standard
  agile practices to deliver software more effectively. The wifi was
  lame in the hotel so we could not watch the talk or even a fraction
  of it, hence the discussion was a bit biased by my vision of Dan
  North's vision.
  
* In the bus back to Strasbourg's station we had an informal
  discussion on *Designing for Operability*. Pierrick talked about his
  experience developing a software which is both used in SAAS and
  hosted mode. The most salient aspect of their approache is that they
  deploy a software without proper sysadmins (eg. developers are the
  sysadmins), and the software is autoinstallable and autoupdatable,
  thus alleviating the need for complex installation and upgrade
  ceremonies. 
  
    Julien who works as head of an operations department gave us some
    more insights on how a large organization handles this. One of their
    strongest requirement is that everything that gets logged by an
    application they operate should be *tracable*: A UID should identify
    the error condition in all layers of the system (eg. client and
    server) and no log should be produced without it. They also ensure
    that code deployment is simply done with a checkout from SVN and
    that tools between developers' stations and servers are
    consistent. Binary artifacts are *versioned*. 
  
## What I Will Do

* **More Haskell**: This is a great language which is easy to develop with
  in all current environments. I have been loving it for years and
  still find it amazing... I plan to revive my git-p4 bridge, making
  it more robusts and usable, and develop a programmable maven shell
  in order to simplify maven builds and common commands.
* **Use FitNesse as documentation hub**: Instead of splitting
  documentation across various repositories, wikis, documents, I
  will try to ensure all project's documentation is kept in FitNesse
  hence versioned alongside the project.
* **Improve FitNesse tests** quality, and turn them into a real
  executable specification. Given that I shall start accompanying a
  new team soon, I will take the time and responsibility to maintain
  the Fitnesse and write more tests, more easily, in order to provide
  a good feedback on where the project is as early as possible.
* **Run Extreme Startup**: This game is both fun and instructive. I
  will submit a proposal to run it for next Agile France conference
  and at my current work. I will try to add more questions in order to
  provide variety and possibly rewrite the graph display part which
  sucks.
* **Review Dan North**'s talk again.
* **Track Technical Debt**
